# WindErosionBenchmarks
This repository contains data and code for different approaches to establish quantitative benchmarks for soil erosion and ecological monitoring, assessment and management.

# Authors

Nicholas P. Webb1, Brandon L. Edwards1, Alexandra Heller1, Sarah E. McCord1, Jeremy W. Schallner1, Ronald S. Treminio1, Brandi Wheeler1, Nelson G. Stauffer1, Sheri Spiegal1, Michael C. Duniway2, Alexander C.E. Traynor3, Emily Kachergis3, Carrie-Ann Houdeshell4

1 USDA-ARS Jornada Experimental Range, Las Cruces, NM, USA
2 US Geological Survey, Southwest Biological Science Center, Moab, UT, USA
3 Bureau of Land Management, National Operations Center, Lakewood, CO, USA
4 USDA-NRCS Resource Inventory and Assessment Division, CEAP-Grazing Lands, Davis, CA, USA

# Created

2011-2019

# Purpose

This repository contains data and R code used and generated by Webb et al. for the manuscript "Establishing quantitative benchmarks for soil erosion and ecological monitoring, assessment and management" submitted for publication in Ecological Indicators.

# Data

Measurements were collected during the period September 2015 to June 2021 at the National Wind Erosion Research Network site on the Jornada Experimental Range in south-central New Mexico, USA. The study site was described by Webb et al. (2016).

Meteorological data were measured with a centrally-located 10 m meteorological tower equipped with cup anemometers at 0.5 m, 1.0 m, 1.5 m, 2.5 m, and 5.0 m above ground level (AGL) , and one RM Young 3002 cup anemometer with a wind vane mounted at 10 m AGL to measure the vertical wind speed profile. A Campbell Scientific EE181 model air temperature/relative humidity probe was mounted at 4.0 m AGL and temperature sensors (model 107-L) were mounted at 2.0 m and 10 m AGL. A tipping bucket rain gauge (TE525) was mounted at 1.5 m AGL approximately 4 m to the northwest of the central tower. The southern 3 m tower was equipped with an RM Young 3002 cup anemometer and wind vane mounted at 3.0 m. Data were sampled at 1 Hz and were logged every 1 min on Campbell Scientific CR1000 data loggers.

Horizontal sediment mass flux was measured using 27 Modified Wilson and Cooke (MWAC) sediment samplers with inlet 2.34 x 10-4 m2 (Webb et al., 2019). The 27 freely rotating masts, each with four MWAC samplers (0.1, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.85 m above ground level) were located across the site using a stratified random sample design. A regular 3 x 3 grid provided strata and three MWAC masts with samplers were randomly located in each grid cell.

Transect data were collected on three parallel 100 m transects spaced 60 degrees apart (from 0 degrees) with the transects passing through the center of the site at the meteorological tower. Methods of Herrick et al. (2018) were used to measure vegetation height, the size distribution of canopy gaps >=5 cm (unvegetated spaces between plant canopies), and foliar cover of vegetation by species and soil surface properties.

# Data files include:

1.	JER2015.zip; JER2016.zip; JER2017.zip; JER2018.zip; JER2019.zip; JER2020.zip; JER2021.zip - These files contain raw meteorological data for each year through XXXX 2021.
2.	JER_CoreIndicators_2015_2021.csv - This file contains indicators of vegetation foliar cover by plant functional group calculated from vegetation transect data collected for each measurement event.
3.	JER_HorizontalFlux_2015_2021.csv - This file contains vertically-integrated horizontal sediment mass fluxes calculated from Modified Wilson and Cooke (MWAC) data for each collection period (2015-2021).

The following lists provide field definitions for the meteorological, core indicators, and horizontal sediment mass flux data.

